Congenital Heart Defects (CHD), also known as a Congenital Heart Anomaly or Congenital Heart Disease, are the most common form of birth defects in children and occur in one percent of all live births worldwide, affecting over 40 million people globally. CHD are present at birth and affect the structure of the heart – interior walls, heart valves, or blood vessels. A baby’s heart begins to take shape and beat during the first six weeks of pregnancy and it is at this stage, that some CHDs begin to develop. The causes are unknown. Research has shown that if there is a history in your family of heart defects, there is 2-3 percent chance of having a child with CHD. Prescription medications for illnesses such as epilepsy can also result in CHD. Mothers with a viral infection like rubella during the first trimester of pregnancy are more likely to give birth to a child with a heart abnormality. Expectant mothers should be warned against consuming alcohol, or illegal drugs as these too can increase a child’s risk of having a heart defect. Women suffering from diabetes, or obesity have a high chance of giving birth to children with CHD. Problems with genes, or chromosomes in a child, such as Down syndrome can be another determinant. There are different types of CHDs, falling mainly into these categories: Holes in the heart Holes can form in the walls between heart chambers or between major blood vessels leaving the heart. These holes allow oxygen-poor blood to mix with oxygen-rich blood, resulting in less oxygen being carried to your child's body. Depending on the size of the hole, this lack of sufficient oxygen can cause your child's skin or fingernails to appear blue or possibly lead to heart failure. Obstructed blood flow When blood vessels or heart valves are narrow because of a defect, the heart must work harder to pump blood through them. Eventually, this leads to enlargement of the heart and thickening of the heart muscle. Abnormal blood vessels Several congenital heart defects happen when blood vessels going to and from the heart don't form correctly, or they're not positioned the way they're supposed to be. Heart valve abnormalities If the heart valves can't open and close correctly, blood can't flow smoothly. underdeveloped heart Sometimes, a major portion of the heart fails to develop properly and cannot effectively pump enough blood to the body. A combination of defects. Some infants are born with several heart defects. Your child's doctor may initially suspect a problem because he or she hears a heart murmur during a routine exam. A heart murmur is an abnormal sound that occurs when blood flows through the heart or blood vessels fast enough to make a sound that a doctor can hear with a stethoscope. Children who suffer from CHDs may also present with bluish discoloration of lips, fingers, or tongue. Recurrent chest infections with rapid, or difficult breathing during activities, poor weight gain are other symptoms. Swelling in the legs, hand, abdomen, or areas around the eye can also be signs. Due to improvement and advancement in technology, doctors can now diagnose early enough if a child will be born with CHD. Most of the serious CHDs are detected during pregnancy with the help of fetal echocardiogram done at 18-22 weeks of pregnancy. Others may be identified immediately after birth. However, the less serious lesions can go undetected until a child is older and begins to show signs and symptoms associated with CHD. Depending on your child's condition, he or she may need surgery to repair the defect. It is important to seek treatment from professionals on CHD. Ideally, a team represented by a cardiothoracic surgeon, paediatric cardiologist, cardiac anaesthetist, cardiac intensivists and cardiac nurses. As one can imagine, these cardiac interventions and surgeries are expensive, costing approximately Sh1.2 million for open heart surgery. In Kenya, children with CHD have benefited greatly from the National Hospital Insurance Fund that finances close to Sh500,000 for such surgical procedures, however, families are unable to raise the balance to have these surgeries and depend largely on hospital welfare and external financial donors. CHD impacts on all aspects of quality of life and therefore, psychological support and education for patients and their parents, guardians, relatives, or caregivers is a crucial factor in achieving better results from treatment. Our vision in Kenya should be geared towards developing a paediatric cardiac care programme and a centre of excellence for CHD to try and reduce the high costs related with the treatment and management of these defects. Children suffering from heart defects need our attention, it is our duty to save these children and improve their quality of life as best as we can.