Reports that the British government has formed a special team to help Kenya trace and recover assets that are proceeds of corruption and hidden in London is quite laudable. According to the British High Commission, specialist government financial analysts and investigators have been posted to Nairobi where they are working with their local counterparts to bust corruption syndicates. It is quite heartening to learn that the British team is tracing every financial dealing of suspected individuals. We opine that Kenya should not sit on its laurels but should also pursue more similar pacts with other nations. The government has been accused of being quite lethargic when it comes to cracking down on corruption suspects and should glean more vital lessons from countries like Britain on how to deal with such cases. A case that comes to mind is the 2014 Chickengate scandal, which saw Britons involved in the scam swiftly prosecuted yet in Kenya the matter has been dragging on at a snail’s pace. That is not how to fight and defeat corruption. Kenyans have been complaining about the slow speed in arresting and prosecuting major corruption suspects. While we agree that any form of corruption is bad, whether little or big, it is time the agencies concerned started focusing more on major graft suspects who have propelled the menace to endemic proportions. Cases of multi-billion shilling corruption have now become commonplace to an extent where the huge figures are no longer mindboggling despite their devastating effects to the general economy of the country. Kenyans want to see those behind the mega corruption scandals swiftly arrested and sent to prison. Assets acquired through corruption proceeds should also be seized. That is the only way the government can succeed in sending out a strong message that corruption will no longer be tolerated in the country. Taking part in the nefarious act should be made very painful so that those thinking of taking that route think twice before dipping their fingers in the trough. We aver that there should be no sacred cows in the war on corruption. All graft suspects must face the full force of the law.