A warrior known for his nobility and honesty went to visit a master to ask him for his advice. When the master had finished his prayers, the warrior asked, “Why do I feel so inferior? I have faced death many times, have defended those who are weak. Nevertheless, upon seeing you meditating, I felt that my life had absolutely no importance whatsoever.” “Wait. Once I have attended to all those who come to see me today, I shall answer you.” – replied the master. The warrior spent the whole day sitting in the temple gardens, watching the people go in and out in search of advice. He saw how the master received them all with the same patience and the same illuminated smile on his face. At nightfall, when everyone had gone, he demanded: “Now can you tell me?” The master invited him in and led him to his room. The full moon shone in the sky, and the atmosphere was one of profound tranquility. “Do you see how beautiful the moon is? It will cross the sky, and tomorrow the sun will shine once again.” “But sunlight is much brighter and can show the details of the landscape around us: trees, mountains, clouds.” “I have observed the sun and the moon for years and have never heard anyone say that the moon is inferior, or the sun is superior. The moon and the sun are different things; each has its own beauty. You cannot compare the two. Likewise, we are two different people, each living in our own [place] that we believe in, and trying it to make the world a better place; the rest are mere appearances.” Comparison is a slippery slope to jealousy: When you look at your life through others lens, you can only see your insecurities shaped by your inner voice and negative attitudes. It is important to realise that each of us is unique and gifted in our own way. It doesn’t matter what others are doing; what matters is what you are doing: You can spend your whole life chasing and tracking what others do, their highs and lows, but what would really matter is what you are doing and how your doings impact your life. A calm mind brings inner strength and self-confidence: The best moments of your day are the times when you can remain calm because a calm and peaceful mind thinks better, acts better and understands better. Forget what you feel, remember what you deserve: You deserve to live your life happily and the way you want it to be. Don’t let others decide or dictate the path you need to take and the choices you need to make. Life is too short to be lived in regret: Life is too short to be wasted regretting about what you could have done better yesterday only to realise you would have to regret tomorrow about wasting your today (regretting). Sriram Bharatam is the Founder & Chief Mentor of Kuza Biashara Limited, a capacity-building organisation coaching youth and SME owners across Africa. He can be reached @Sbharatam or Sri@Kuza.One