Q “I was recently posted to a new department of a machinery company that has seen me work mainly on weekends. I find this shift rather upsetting to my moods though I cannot explain why. I love the job but working weekends leaves me feeling unexpectedly low. Is this psychological?” *** Over the years, we have been asked many questions similar to yours, which in themselves reveal a measure of a lack of understanding of psychological phenomenon. When you tell us that you feel low moods after working on weekends and would like to know if “this is psychological” what exactly do you intend to convey? Is it perhaps to say that because it is “only psychological” it is not real? Let me state here now, that whatever you feel (psychological or physically) is as real as you feel it and you do not need to justify your feelings by trying to make those feelings any more (or less) real than they are! Whatever your feelings are, they are real and valid, and you have no reason to apologise for how you feel. When your mother or boyfriend hurts you “for no reason” that does not invalidate your feeling of hurt! As young medical students, we were taught by many well-meaning teachers whose knowledge base (it now turns out) could have been better. In the 70s, our teachers told us about “psychological” conditions, which existed only in the minds of the patients, and which by extension were not real diseases. In this category of conditions was one called hypochondriasis. A person suffering from this condition was obviously called a hypochondriac. It is part for this reason that the most recent edition of the diagnostic manual has removed this term as a diagnostic category. It is however recognised that persons with this cluster of symptoms still suffer significant distress and impairment. To suggest that hypochondriasis is the same as an imaginary condition is to demonstrate great ignorance. If you have suffered a shift in your moods without explanation, we must take you seriously and investigate whether this change is due to working on weekends or whether something else could be in play. Your doctor cannot treat you other than with full respect if you tell him of your suffering. Towards the end of our five-year medical training, we were allowed (encouraged) to spend time in the casualty department of the hospital. We made some mistakes for which we must seek forgiveness. We saw patients who had what we recognised as hysteria. Most were young women and most came to us with symptoms that we were told were “only psychological”. This term was (according to our teachers) meant to portray the fact that these women were only pretending to be unwell. Cotton wool bathed in ammonia was the treatment of choice. For a woman who was hysterical and could not, for example, walk, this poisonous substance was placed on her face causing her to breath the fumes that led to much pain in her breathing system. The pain was enough to cause the woman to jump and run, a fact that led to much laughter by the medical students, amazement by the relatives whose patient could now “rise and walk” and great amusement to bystanders. Sadly, this type of abuse of patients continues in a few institutions, because this level of ignorance has been passed on from generation to generation! Such women went on to later commit suicide because the cause of the hysteria had not been addressed. What we (like you) treated as “only psychological” sometimes turned out to be just that. A serious psychological illness! In this day and age, we no longer use such crude methods, and medical students are taught to listen to patients rather than cause them pain and suffering. On behalf of my teachers and fellow students I say, we are truly very sorry.