Travel advisories, a glut in hotels and lodges in competitive locations and higher energy costs, key challenges, it says Hospitality chain TPS Eastern Africa recorded a 50-percent jump in net profit in the year ended last December, helped by a lower tax bill. The operator of the Serena brand of hotels recorded net earnings of Sh179 million in the review period compared to Sh119.4 million the year before. Its income tax expense fell 54.3 percent to Sh64.4 million from Sh141.2 million. The company’s past losses and new investments in its properties have made it possible to deduct taxes on future earnings. TPS declared a dividend of Sh0.35 per share, the same level as the payout for the previous year. The dividend will be paid on July 25 to shareholders on record as of June 25. The company’s sales rose nearly three percent to Sh6.5 billion. TPS says it expects improved performance in the near term, citing political stability and investments in its properties. “Following the stabilisation of Kenya’s political environment in the second quarter 2018, market sentiment continues to indicate a consistent return of confidence in the tourism sector,” the company said in a statement. “Indeed this optimism has been prevalent beyond Kenya and extended across the East African region.” TPS added that its main challenges include travel advisories, a glut in hotels and lodges in competitive locations and increases in energy and other operating costs. The company completed the first phase of the redevelopment of its Nairobi Serena Hotel last August, leading to improved performance in the fourth quarter of last year, the hotel chain said. The redevelopment included construction of new bedrooms, ballroom, meeting rooms and public areas which generated incremental revenues. The final phase of the hotel’s expansion is expected to be completed in June. Similarly works at Kampala Serena Hotel and Dar es Salaam Serena Hotel in 2017 have subsequently contributed positively during the year under review. “Early indications from these strategic business developments are encouraging and validate the board’s vision to reposition the Serena City Hotel brand in Nairobi, Kampala and Dar es Salaam,” TPS said. The company is set to open Goma Serena Hotel in the Democratic Republic of Congo in the third quarter.