A company tasked with constructing the controversial Sh7.5 billion liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) has found itself in trouble after Mombasa County government cancelled approval for the project. Thursday, Lands, Planning and Housing executive Edward Nyale in a statement said the administration had revoked the approval it had given to Mansa East Africa Limited. Mr Nyale said the approval was cancelled following new information that came to the county’s knowledge coupled with “material omissions” on their application for the construction permit. “The county government of Mombasa proceeded to cancel the approval issued on 20th March 2019 vide a letter to the Directors of Mansa Africa Limited on 12th April 2019 outlining the reasons for the same including safety concerns and contraventions to the zoning regulations,” reads the statement sent to newsroom. The cancellation of the approval by the county govermement put it among key institutiuons that had opposed the project following safety concerns. Among agencies that have objected to the construction of the project is the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC), Kenya Ports Authority (KPA), Kenya Ferry Services (KFS), Kenya Navy and the Mombasa Yacht Club. The National Environment Management Authority (Nema) is the only body that has given a nod to the project despite earlier rejection. Earlier, Nema shared concerns with the other bodies that the plant would be close to the navigation channel, a school (Sacred Heart High School) residential and commercial areas, and asked the investors to consider an alternative site. Yesterday, Mombasa county added that it has also advised the directors of Mansa Africa Limited to seek an alternative site for the project. In its statement on Wednesday, the company said it had got a nod from the county government. The firm said it had also conducted extensive communications with key stakeholders and key letters of “no objection” given to them by all the key agencies including ERC, KPA, Kenya Navy, KMA and the Mombasa Yacht Club.