The massive delay being experienced in cargo clearance at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport deserves urgent action to fix the mess. It is unbelievable that businesses have been stuck with unmet customer orders for close to a month now due to customs delays. The situation is dire with some cargo and vending firms reporting that it now takes about a month to fully clear consignments at JKIA. Traders have blamed the muddle on stringent customs clearance under the Integrated Customs Management System (iCMS) that was recently installed by the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA). This is a hurdle that ought to be cleared. Although the KRA claimed that it had addressed the teething problems with its new system, it cannot run away from the obvious challenges that importers are having to endure trying to clear their goods at JKIA. The taxman should review the operations of the iCMS with an aim of achieving efficiency to ensure that businesses are not adversely affected by the Customs bottlenecks. The essence of airfreight is speed, safety and efficiency hence the KRA system should not be a disabler for businesses dealing in urgent cargo such as medical products or highly perishable items. It would be in the interest of the taxman to improve the efficiency of the iCMS right away to avoid further chaos from May 10 when the system is formally rolled out to other airports. A notice issued by KRA last week shows that importers using JKIA, Mombasa and Eldoret airports will from next week have to submit import declaration forms, air manifests security bonds and air cargo declaration documents through then iCMS before their goods can be cleared. Whereas this is fine for accountability, it ought not be used to frustrate business owners. Logistics is a vital component in the supply chain and inefficiencies that risk causing disruptions or increasing the cost of doing business should be avoided. For now, the iCMS is the weak link in the airfreight logistics chain and the taxman should act and clear all the encumbrances associated with it before requiring all importers to adopt the system.