He had not won a golf Major in 14 years, he is 43-years old and has had four back surgeries since 2014, including a spinal fusion operation in 2017 that saw him sit out that year’s PGA season. In May 2017, he was arrested on a drinking under the influence charge in Florida, US – the images and video from episode portrayed Tiger Woods at probably his lowest moments ever. He was ranked 1,199th on the Official World Golf Ranking (OWGR) at the end of that year. Since his 2008 US Open victory, Woods has been in hell, literally – a golf career at risk due to serious injuries, chased from his home in 2009 and then divorced from his wife Elin Nordegren. In 2010, The New York Post published a monthly photo calendar featuring Wood’s many mistresses including waitress Mindy Lawton, porn stars Joslyn James and Holly Sampson, New York nightclub hostess Rachel Uchitel and model Jamie Jungers. The choice newspaper headlines at the that time included these ones by the New York Post: “Tiger Puts Balls in Wrong Place Again” and “Tiger Pulls OUT!” And “I’m a Cheetah” and “Tiger goes Limp!” The Daily News joined in the attack, going with “Tiger Hides his Tale” and Tiger’s Worst Drive”. Woods would later check himself into a sex addiction rehabilitation clinic and issue a public apology to his wife, family and friends in 2010 – an apology that was aired live across the globe by all major news channels. “I am deeply sorry for my irresponsible and selfish behaviour,” Woods said. “I do plan to return to golf one day, I just don’t know when that will be.” For a man who had rewritten history, in golf and in sports, Woods was a pale shadow of himself thereafter; fighting injury, changing swing coaches and caddies, adjusting to new relationships, losing sponsors and attempting to regain his ‘mojo’. Woods went through the 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017 PGA Tour seasons without a single victory. And whilst we can laugh and mock those who wrote him off, the stats were painting a grim picture of Woods – a champion no more. Woods played ONE event in 2017, the Farmers Insurance Open and missed the CUT! When he finished T23 at the 2018 Farmers Insurance Open, his comeback was just beginning. His 2018 record included T2 at the Valspar Championship, T5 at the Arnold Palmer Invitational, T32 at the Masters, T11 at the Players, T6 at the Open and runner up finish at the PGA Championship. And finally, he got to the finish line, winning the TOUR Championship – the final event of the 2018 PGA Tour season – announcing his comeback. But the doubts lingered, would this winning form hold? Was this a flash in the pan? Was it a false alarm? Woods was impressive at the 2019 WGC-Dell Technologies Match Play, where he beat Rory MCIlroy before going down to Lucas Bjerregaard. And last Sunday, at golf’s biggest stage, Woods tasted major victory – winning his fifth green jacket, his 14th Major and his 81st PGA Tour win! And yes, he also banked $2.25 million (Sh227.9 million) from the total prize kitty of $12.5 million (Sh1.12 billion). Tiger Woods was back! He was truly back! Golf pundits ran out of words to describe what we witnessed on Sunday, Twitter was awash with congratulatory messages for the man of the moment – Tiger Woods! The Sun went with a naughty headline “I’m the daddy”, the Independent called it “The greatest comeback ever!” The Times went with: “A Walking Miracle”. The Scotsman had what will surely become an iconic picture of Woods at the 18th green, saying: “The ultimate sporting comeback”. Metro Sports also went with “The greatest comeback”. The Daily Telegraph added to the comeback story: “The greatest comeback since Muhammad Ali”. Woods made it to the front pages of the New York Times, USA Today, New York Post and even the Wall Street Journal . They all paid tribute to this great comeback. But it was perhaps Sports Illustrated who made the loudest statement by not saying anything – all they had was a picture of Tiger Woods on their front cover, seemingly roaring. US President Donald Trump started promoting the match on Twitter: “Great Masters going on right now. @TigerWoods is leading with 2 holes left to play. Very exciting, tune in!” He went on to say: “Watching final hole of @TheMasters. @TigerWoods is looking GREAT!” And after the victory Trump wrote: “Congratulations to @TigerWoods., a truly Great Champion!” Tiger Woods is now ranked sixth on the OWGR! Enough said.