Plastic pollution presents a major threat to the ecological system. It is estimated that up to 12 million metric tonnes of plastic waste leak into water systems every year. And they take centuries to break down. Considering the increasing production of single-use plastics that arise from the throwaway culture, waterways get clogged. These plastics all end up in the oceans. By 2050, there will be 12 billion tonnes of plastic waste in natural environments. Recently, the top plastic polluters in Africa formed the Africa Plastic Recycling Alliance. Even though most of them acknowledge the impacts and severity of plastics, they keep hiding under false solutions such as recycling. Considering that more than 90percent of the plastics produced have not been recycled, recycling alone won’t help. Oceans are home to species, provide livelihoods, generate revenue through activities such as tourism, and absorb excess carbon from the atmosphere. Big pieces of plastic choke and entangle species like whales, turtles and seabirds, while tiny pieces of plastic are mistaken for food – choking and poisoning marine species such as fish. There is a growing need to move away from single-use plastics and the throw-away culture imagining waste can magically disappear. Collecting and recycling a small proportion of plastic waste is more like greenwashing. Businesses need to urgently and concretely avoid false solutions by investing in reusables and new product delivery models that promote plastic-free systems and protect our oceans, people and livelihoods. Organisations must commit to phasing out single-use plastics. It is urgent. There is a need to promote businesses that are increasingly eliminating the use of plastics in operations. For instance, businesses that bring local, fresh food to people without plastic packaging, encourage deposit refunds for bottles and have refill systems such as milk ATMs rather than recycling. African governments must restrict the types and quality of packaging through legislation such as bans to accelerate the transition to a plastic-free future. Governments need to provide economic incentives to encourage re-using and refilling. Tax reliefs and subsidies on products and delivery that provide lasting and real solutions will foster improvements in innovation. Also, improvement on the implementation of legislation will push businesses that are resistant to re-think their models. Strict implementation of the ban on single-use plastic carrier bags in the countries where this has come into force and less provision of exemptions may play a major role in the transition to a plastic-free future in Africa. Finally, it is time to focus on real solutions and not false promises and plans based on the same old tired corporate narrative of recycling and clean-ups. It is time to slay the plastic monster once and for all, to banish it from our lives and from our communities and to demand an end to throwaway plastic production. It is time to stop plastic pollution at the source.