That the government has frozen travel for civil servants holding the old versions of the Kenyan passport shows just how committed it is in ensuring that all citizens migrate to the e-passport by September. However, the move also spotlights the need for the Department of Immigration to speed up the issuance of the new documents. According to the Head of Public Service Joseph Kinyua, only the new generation digital passports will be functional from September 1, four months to go. Unless deliberate measures are taken to speed up issuance, many Kenyans could be barred from travelling even before the change-over happens since a passport must be valid for at least six months. As it is now, the issuance process is messy, with hundreds of people thronging Nyayo House in Nairobi from as early five in the morning each day to have a chance of completing the lengthy but necessary steps or acquiring the document. Granted, the e-passports have more enhanced security features, suitable for the volatile era of terrorism and identity, reducing chances of cross-border crimes. However, it is unacceptable that the government as the issuer has not put in place plans to ensure that its officers travel without hitches, many months before the deadline. What with this late alert, it is expected that people not working for the government may face more delays and end up messing up the travel plans for students, investors, or tourists whose dates are fixed or are difficult to change. As a matter of fact, the government should, at this time, use its priority travel list to make sure that its officials have the document, lest the delays and hitches hurt key programmes. In February, the Immigration Desk announced that there will be more issuing centres in the regions, decentralising since 2017. Having regional centres will be a step in the right direction but they should work efficiently in line with the August 31 deadline. It is upon Immigration to also run campaigns informing the public on the availability of more passport centres. But it is also incumbent upon Kenyans to go for the new documents in good time, instead of waiting for the last-minute to throng the passports desks, causing unnecessary delays and painful disappointments.