While the capital markets have been an important exit route for private equity (PE) houses around the globe, PEs leaving through initial public offerings (IPO) in the continent have tracked below other markets. Consequently, non-PE-backed IPOs have formed the bulk of offerings’ activity in Africa, with other exits, such as sale to strategic investors, secondary sales to other PE, or financial investors, proving more popular for PE investors. This is according to the Africa PE-backed IPOs (2010-2017) report. Not so happy news for public market players but all the same important for some reflection. But first key highlights of the report. Over the eight-year period ending in 2017, Africa PE-backed IPOs as a percentage of total IPOs averaged just 16 percent in terms of volume and 23 percent in terms of value. The Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE)-led African exchanges as an exit destination for PE-backed IPOs in terms of value—this included the single largest PE exit by value, the Sh68 billion IPO of Life Healthcare Group by Old Mutual Private Equity and Brimstone Investment Corporation (Brimstone). The largest number of African PE-backed IPOs, by both volume and value, was in 2010, with five IPOs valued at Sh100 billion. The consumer goods sector represented the largest number of African PE-backed exits with seven IPOs raising Sh54 billion, accounting for 17 percent of the total number of PE-backed IPOs. And here are my thoughts on the report. One, a burgeoning PE secondary sales market means there is a demand that’s being met in a “non-conventional” way. An active secondary platform shows that PE funds have a reliable option to build portfolios of private investments, achieve diversification and provide liquidity and rebalancing flexibility to other PE players in a cost-efficient way. It’s estimated that this space will likely to continue to grow exponentially as more PE capital finds its way into Africa. According to a recent survey by Preqin, PE secondary transactions in 2017 hit a record of Sh6 trillion, an increase of 57 percent on the previous year. This is the real threat to African public markets. Will they evolve to grab some of that business or remain permanently in a state of arrested development? Time will tell. Two, PE preference for non-IPO exits is a clear testament that the need for deep and liquid markets is a must. The trend shows a lack of confidence in the current state of most African bourses. In contrast to the local context, according to the report, over the same period, PE-backed IPOs in the United States and the United Kingdom averaged 39 percent and 36 percent in terms of volume, respectively, and 44 percent and 45 percent in terms of value, respectively. Further, outside of Africa, the London Stock Exchange (LSE) remains the preferred destination for PE exits from African portfolio companies. A lack of mature public exit platforms means that although Africa may present strong growth PE opportunities, its public exchange business will continue to lose. For those that love public markets, the report is a poignant reminder of our reality. However, it’s a call to action to find a way that works. Mwanyasi is MD, Canaan Capital Limited