Beleaguered healthcare provider, The Nairobi Hospital, seems to be riding wave after wave of negative publicity. Fresh in the wake of a prolonged tussle with the outgoing CEO, came a cholera scare at the facility that has since been contained. The hospital is now entangled in a wrangle between two factions seeking to wrest control of the boardroom. Several theories have been advanced regarding the direct and proxy wars, but the top reason seems to be control or influence over the group's vast and growing resources. In what is now appearing to be a recurring conflict issue amongst high revenue health facilities, (a not very dissimilar scenario played out at the St Mary's group of hospitals last year) points to a deeper rooted issue of weak internal structures in hospitals. For a majority of health enterprises, the founding approaches seem to be the seed of discomtent later on. Most of our entities begin as friendly associates businesses. It appears the principles, trust and values quickly get eroded once a business reaches a certain revenue threshold. By contrast there is often less wrangles during the early periods. Specifically, procurement and human resource appear as Achilles heels. In small facilities, founders often ride on both to "synergistically" build up their other business portfolios. Many double as suppliers and have a big say in hiring and firing of employees. Given that many of our health enterprises will soon reach this growth threshold, based on the current private health sector boom, stakeholders in such entities need to learn from the ongoing debacles to avoid falling into the same pitfall. For smaller enterprises, the founding principles, business models and dispute resolution mechanisms need formalisation and agreed upon modus operandi. Otherwise, trouble is sure to follow. This is where management consultants would come in handy. But it seems transitioning to the second phase of management cohorts is the weak point. The ethos, camaraderie and visions of the founders must be eroded and forgotten to give way to legal management approaches. At the core of conflicts though is entitlement, arising from who brought what, who did what and what they would get out of it. Quite tricky, particularly for succession phase businesses. Traditionally, a mix of cash, assets and time/influence contributions (sweat capital) characterised most of our investments at inception. How do we apportion return on investment for each of these classes of capital? Some owners would feel more entitled especially if their investment tool appreciated more over the other investors. Also where investors double as "marketers or lobby for more or new business", an entitlement arises. Organisations must learn to dissociate themselves earlyfrom these certain recipe for conflict of interest.