Reports that the Kenya Medical Supplies Authority (Kemsa) has shut its supply lines on a number of counties make for a depressing revelation and warrant urgent attention. A country that grapples with a heavy disease burden such as Kenya can ill-afford to forgo affordable services of the kind rendered by the taxpayer-financed Kemsa. The country must fix its public medical supply system to ensure that the public is not needlessly exposed to a shortage of medicine. At the moment, the situation is dysfunctional. The latest report indicates that Narok, Nairobi and Murang’a counties have been barred by the agency due to non-payment while four others have had to stop seeking the government-procured drugs altogether. The bone of contention, records suggest, is a debt starting with Sh284 million owed by Nairobi followed by Narok’s Sh104.5 million and Murang’a which is yet to pay Sh21 million. Similarly, Kwale, Kericho, Kilifi and Makueni counties have not ordered fresh drugs from Kemsa in the last three months due to a combined debt of Sh113 million. It is understood that the list of defaulting counties would be longer had it not been for the State’s universal health coverage drive being piloted in Isiolo, Kisumu, Nyeri and Machakos. The reality on the ground is that public hospitals are frequented by low income earners. These are the people who need to enjoy the economies of scale that go with mass procurement of drugs as done by Kemsa. Apart from the doctors’ fees, the other large chunk of medical care budget is usually the cost of drugs. That makes it paradoxical to speak of universal health care when the drugs supply system for public hospital is not working as efficiently as it should. Moreover, it has been shown that county health facilities handle most of the chronic diseases such as HIV/Aids, TB and malaria whose treatment require constant supply of drugs. That the 47 counties owe Kemsa a total of Sh2.3 billion in unpaid bills for drugs speaks volumes about the preparedness of the devolved units to handle the health docket. Whether it is by prudent use of resources or asking the State to raise allocation to health, drugs must be made readily available.