High in the beautiful mountains, a family of monkeys was playing in the trees. While they were playing, one of them looked down into the well and saw the moon at the bottom of a well. He called all his monkey friends to show the moon in the well. Very concerned, all the monkeys investigated the moon in the well. An older monkey ran over, looked into the well and said, “Goodness me! The moon is really in the water!” “The moon is supposed to be in the sky, not inside a well.” thought the monkeys. “The moon must have fallen into the well. We need to get the moon out of the well!” they decided, so they found a bucket and formed a long chain holding onto each other’s tails to reach down into the well. The oldest monkey hanged on the tree upside down, with his feet on the branch. And he pulled the next monkey’s feet with his hands. All the other monkeys followed suit, and they joined each other one by one down to the moon in the well. Just as the last monkey could almost scoop the moon into her bucket, the one at the top felt his grip slipping. Suddenly, all the monkeys tumbled into the well, their bucket flying into the air. As they looked up from the bottom, they saw the moon glistening in the sky. “A job well done,” they congratulated each other. “Now how do we get out of the well?” Good and bad are just two different perspectives. They look very similar, just that the perspective changes. To change things in life, get a new perspective. What you see depends not only on what you look at but also on where you look from: Be an observer, think outside of yourself, outside of the situation. Don’t try and judge people because of the opinions they carry. Everything we hear about is not a fact, everything we see is a perspective, not the truth: People always question good things about others, but always believe bad things. Remember, rumors are always carried by haters, spread by fools and believed by idiots. When a flower doesn’t bloom you fix the environment it is in, not the flower itself: If you don’t understand the root of the problem, you will never be able to solve it. Take a systematic approach – think of the contributing factors, underlying issues, drill down, root it out and take corrective action to prevent future recurrences. We do not see things as they are, but we see things as we are: It’s only when we cross over our fears that we can see hopes and dreams. If you want to succeed, don’t do different things, just do things differently. Those mountains that you are carrying on, you were only meant to climb: Things are meant to be simple, it is we who over-engineer them or over-complicate them. Mr Bharatam is the Founder & Chief Mentor of Kuza Biashara Limited, a capacity-building organization coaching youth & SME owners across Africa. He can be reached @Sbharatam or Sri@Kuza.One