The government will address the water hyacinth and pollution challenges around Lake Victoria in order to improve fishing, tourism and lake transport in the region. State Department for Shipping and Maritime Affairs Principal Secretary (PS) Nancy Karigithu told a workshop on Lake Victoria’s Preparedness for revamped Blue Economy activities that the government is implementing measures to make sure those problems are addressed and the lake returns to its original form. The one-day workshop at Sunset Hotel in Kisumu last week was organised by the Kenya Maritime Authority (KMA). It was aimed at preparing various stakeholders in the Lake region to benefit from the revamped blue economy activities in the area and sensitise them on maritime safety, security and marine pollution prevention. “Lake Victoria is one of the most important shared natural resources by partner states of the East African Community, puts food on the table for our people and money in their pockets. Therefore, it is our responsibility to take care of it to ensure it continues to play this pivotal role in the region and globally, Dr Karigithu said. She said the Lake Victoria Basin is grappling with majorly water hyacinth, issues of rapid population growth, land degradation and declining agricultural productivity. “The water hyacinth problem has been a thorn in our flesh for too long. Since its advent, the fishing business has been reduced by 30 percent, negatively impacting the livelihood of communities’ dependent on fishing and negatively affecting our economy,” she said. Ms Karigithu further said that lake transport in the region had also been affected with ports around it being often blocked. The menace, she said, had also made fish landing sites inaccessible and movement with small boats often obstructed. The PS said this had resulted in dwindling tourism revenue as visitor attraction sites continued to deteriorate. “We are committed to eradicating water hyacinth from the lake a progress that is done through collaboration with the county government, World Bank, Lake Victoria Basin Commission and through the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase III. Eradication of hyacinth is certain,” she added. Apart from the removal of the hyacinth, the government would complete dredging the harbour in one year and three months. “Once completed, we would like to see the Lake Basin revert to and surpass its original glory in terms of economic activities,” the PS said. Dr Karigithu said with the completion of the Kisumu Oil Jetty by the Kenya Pipeline Company, there now exists an alternative competitive oil transport business to the neighbouring countries. “With the operationalisation of the Kisumu Oil Jetty and a hyacinth-free lake, we foresee a vibrant lake economy, improved lake transport, the fishing industry will be revitalised while tourism and sports activities will once again increase,” she added. She also cautioned over the increased activities on the lake she said will naturally lead to increased risks in terms of oil spills, unsafe transport practices and accidents. “In this regard, there is need to assess ourselves and provide recommendations on the state of preparedness in the key areas of pollution prevention and control on the lake especially oil spill control, safety of lake users, search and rescue operations,” the PS said.