Nzoia Sugar Company Managing Director Michael Kulundu was nursing injuries at the Bungoma West Hospital Thursday morning after he was allegedly abducted by unknown people last evening around 8:30pm. He is said to have been having fun at Salmond Restaurant located along the Kanduyi-Sikata highway before the incident. He was early Thursday morning found dumped in a trench near Gulf Petrol Station, which is approximately 100 metres from the restaurant. While confirming the incident, Bungoma South OCPD Patrick Nyangares said they were investigating the matter. "We are currently recording statements from his family members and I want to assure everyone that we have already launched investigations into this matter with a view of bringing the culprits to book," said Mr Nyangares, who was flanked by the county police commander Francis Sang. The hospital's Clinical Administrator Denis Sande said Mr Kulundu was brought to the facility on Thursday morning by his personal driver who said they had found him besides the road. "At around 7am, we received a male patient by the name Michael Kulundu who happens to be the MD Nzoia Sugar Company. He had suffered multiple cut wounds on the head, right hand, chest and lower limbs. The cuts were stitched," Mr Sande told journalists in his office. He went on: "We have conducted x-rays, CT scan and we can confirm that he is in stable condition because there were no internal injuries." Further investigations Mr Sande said Mr Kulundu had been transferred to another medical facility for further investigation and management. A close family member who requested anonymity said that they found him (Kulundu) early Thursday morning, dumped in a trench beside the road before they moved him to hospital. They had been patrolling the entire area the whole night where he was last evening. "When he failed to come home last evening, we launched a search for him the whole night. Our main focus was where he was last seen. It was until around 5am that we found him dumped in a trench along the road before we moved him to hospital," the family member said. "We also suspect that he was sedated by his tormentors before he was taken away," said the family member. He urged the police to move in with speed and investigate the matter and bring the culprits to book.