The Agriculture ministry has warned of a re-emergence of a fall armyworm outbreak as the North Rift region, the country’s food basket, prepares to plant this season's crop. The armyworm infestation damaged hectares of the crop in the country last season. The repeated outbreak of the dreaded pest is expected especially in marginal agricultural areas where there were infestations during the short rains. “The Fall Armyworm infestations are likely to re-occur in a majority of the counties and cause damage to crops due to the migratory nature of the pests,” said a report released by the ministry this month on the state of food security in the country. It, however, maintains that the damage by the fall armyworm to crop yields on long rains marginal crops is expected to be less compared to the previous seasons. The pests destroyed hectares of crops in Kitale, Bungoma, Kakamega, Uasin Gishu, Trans Nzoia, Busia, Nandi, Kericho, Baringo and Nakuru counties last season, subjecting farmers to heavy losses. “The improved capacity of pest management interventions including positioning of pesticides will help contain the spread of the deadly pests,” added the report. Drought alert The National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) meanwhile has warned that thousands of families in 23 counties are facing hunger and starvation due to crop failure caused by poor rainfall. It has issued drought alert on seven counties and agriculture experts warn that a re-occurrence of the armyworm will complicate food security in the country. “We are staring at a disaster unless the government acts fast to contain repeated outbreak of the deadly pests and hasten distribution of relief supplies to thousands of the famine stricken families,” said Ezekiel Too, an agricultural expert in Eldoret. More than 100,000 in Turkana North region are already faced with an acute shortage of food after they exhausted their stock and are appealing for urgent relief supplies. The situation has been complicated by invasion of locusts that have destroyed crops and green vegetation, resulting in lack of pasture for livestock. Turkana North MP Christopher Nakuleau Monday appealed to the government and humanitarian agencies to hasten distribution of relief supplies to the famine stricken families. “The is likely to worsen due to persistent drought that has impacted negatively on animal production, which is the main source of food to the locals,” said Mr Nakuleau. He said the famine has been made worse by the retaliatory attacks among pastoralists from Kenya, Ethiopia and South Sudan caused by demand for water and pasture for their livestock.